I think we should do this in three stages, rather than trying to turn everything into a desktop app at once.

Stage 1 — Build the real Windows launcher

This is the most important piece.

We create a proper Willard Media Center desktop installer that:

Installs the Media Center
Creates a desktop icon
Creates a Start Menu entry
Starts the required local services automatically
Checks PostgreSQL
Checks the API
Checks the media/NAS connection
Checks for updates
Applies safe updates
Repairs things automatically when possible
Starts the Media Center
Opens the installed Media Center

The user should never need to see:

Start / Stop / Update / Repair

Those become internal functions.

Stage 2 — Separate the "launcher" from the Media Center

I'd make two pieces:

Willard Media Center Launcher

This is the tiny Windows application that lives on the computer.

Its job is basically:

Make sure Media Center is healthy and running.

Then:

Willard Media Center

This is the actual media application you interact with.

That separation is important because the launcher can start/stop/update/repair things that a browser or PWA cannot.

Stage 3 — Build the update system properly

Then your workflow stays extremely simple.

You continue developing like you do now:

Make changes → Git push → Replit builds/releases

The user's computer doesn't need Git.

The launcher checks for a new release:

New Media Center version available

Then automatically:

Download → verify → update → migrate if necessary → restart → verify

If something goes wrong, it should be able to roll back rather than leaving your Media Center broken.

One thing I would change from the current plan

I wouldn't package PostgreSQL, Node, FFmpeg, etc. into the first installer automatically unless we determine that's actually necessary.

We should first figure out exactly what the Media Center truly needs locally.

I'd have Replit audit:

What absolutely has to run on Windows?

What can run remotely?

What can be bundled?

What needs access to the NAS?

What needs PostgreSQL?

What can be replaced with something simpler?

That could substantially simplify the final installer.

So our immediate next task should be:

Have Replit design and implement the true Windows installer + desktop launcher, while first auditing the current local dependencies so we don't unnecessarily install a bunch of software.

Once that's working, your experience becomes:

Install once → desktop icon → double-click → Media Center handles everything.

I would make that the foundation before we continue improving the actual Media Center features.

ok lets start it
Replit

Yes. I’ve started the next phase now.

Replit is building the unified Windows launcher/installer foundation, including the desktop icon, Start Menu entry, automatic startup/update/repair flow, and dependency audit. It will preserve the existing PWA and Media Center functionality while replacing the manual startup process with the one-click experience we discussed.

I’ll keep this phase focused on getting the desktop installation and lifecycle working correctly first.

Replit

Sent it. Replit is now working through that full desktop-installation milestone in the order we laid out.

The goal is now the real one-click Windows Media Center experience, not just another startup script.

Replit

Sent. Replit is now preparing the project for the first real Windows installer build and installation test.

Replit

Yes. I just sent Replit a full startup-failure fix request based on exactly what your Windows computer is doing.

It is now working on:

Fixing the API/library service actually failing to start
Checking the real root cause instead of adding more retries
Making sure the process being started is the same one being health-checked
Fixing Windows production/development startup mismatches
Making PostgreSQL startup handling reliable
Removing interactive startup problems
Improving the error/logging so we know exactly what fails
Adding a regression test for the failure you just experienced
Keeping the packaged installer and automatic-update architecture intact

Don't run the old Start Willard AI launcher again until this update finishes.

After Replit finishes, we'll test the corrected startup path before worrying about the GitHub release.

Right — that confirms the new token still hasn't been used. The Shell is continuing to authenticate with Replit's old OAuth credential.

Let's stop trying git push until we switch the credential.

We can do this safely

The token you created should be entered only when Git asks for a password.

The problem is that Git currently has credentials cached, so it never asks you.

I want to avoid having you put the token into a command or into a file where it could accidentally be saved.

First, tell me one thing: when you run git push in the Replit Shell, does it ever ask you for:

Username for 'https://github.com':
Password for 'https://github.com':

or does it immediately go straight to the Enumerating objects... message?

If it goes straight to Enumerating objects, the old credential is cached, and we'll clear just that credential and then Git will prompt you for the new token.

no it doesnt ask for username and anything

Exactly. That confirms it: Git is using a cached Replit credential automatically, so it never gives you a chance to enter your new token.

We can fix that without putting your token into the project.

Do this in the Replit Shell

First, run:

git config --show-origin --get-all credential.helper

Don't paste any token or password.

Send me the result. That will tell us what credential system Replit is using, and then I'll give you the safest way to make Git prompt for your new token.

blank

Okay — blank means Git isn't showing a normal configured credential helper. That makes sense with Replit's managed Git authentication.

Don't enter the token anywhere yet.

We can take a cleaner route: have Replit itself fix the GitHub authentication rather than fighting the managed credential system from the Shell.

I'll have Replit inspect its Git integration and, if possible, reauthenticate the GitHub remote using the correct workflow permissions. It should not expose or modify your token.

If that still isn't possible, we'll use a temporary GitHub credential method as the fallback.