Based on everything you've shown over the last couple of days, I actually believe the application is incorrectly reporting that the NAS is offline, not that your WD My Cloud is actually disconnecting.

Here's why:

You consistently say you can still access Z:\ from Windows.
The app continues to display and browse your indexed media.
The scan often reaches 100% before getting stuck.
The NAS path remains configured correctly.
The "Test NAS Path" feature was throwing a JavaScript error (Illegal return statement), which is an application bug—not a network error.

None of that points to a physically disconnected NAS.

My leading suspicion now

I think there are two separate problems that are interacting:

The NAS health detection is unreliable.
It sometimes concludes the NAS is offline when it isn't.
The broken Worker you found is one confirmed bug in that area.
The synchronous polling/health-check logic may also be overly aggressive.
The job state machine is getting stuck.
Scan reaches 100% but never transitions to a terminal state.
Thumbnail generation sits at 0 indefinitely.
The UI remains in "Scanning..." for hours.

Those two issues can easily reinforce each other.

What I would ask Replit to verify

Rather than assuming the NAS is offline, I'd have it log every offline decision.

For example:

Library health check
path=Z:\
online=false
reason=...

Immediately followed by:

Pausing indexing
source=library_monitor
scanId=...

If the logs show:

online=false

while Windows can still browse Z:\, then you've proven the application is producing a false offline detection.

One thing that concerns me

The application should never tell the user "NAS Offline" without explaining why.

Instead of just saying:

NAS Offline

it should expose the underlying reason, for example:

ENOENT
ETIMEDOUT
EACCES
Worker timeout
Health check failed
SMB unreachable

Right now you're flying blind because the UI collapses all failures into "offline."

I would add another task

I'd create something like:

#172 – Diagnose false NAS offline detection

Acceptance criteria:

Every transition to OFFLINE is logged with:
timestamp
reason/error
exception (if any)
health-check duration
whether Windows path access actually failed
Every transition back ONLINE is logged.
The UI shows the actual failure reason instead of a generic "NAS Offline."
The application only changes to OFFLINE after the configured debounce threshold.

That task won't fix the bug by itself, but it will tell you exactly why the application believes the NAS is offline. Right now, based on your evidence, I think the application is making incorrect health decisions rather than your WD My Cloud actually dropping off the network.