everything is slow and my drive isnt that slow, but every start up i have to wait awhile for the media folder to even show up but that should already know whats in there right? plus i have left this on for hours and it stays in scanning mode and it hasnt even got the thumbnails put on the images its already created. 

From everything you've shown me over the last few days, I don't think your biggest problem is that the NAS is slow.

I think your application is acting like it has amnesia every time it starts.

A few things stand out from your screenshots:

The dashboard already knows there are 21,682 photos, 2,625 videos, 234 documents and 24,551 files. That means the database already contains the library.
Yet the top bar immediately says "Scanning..." on startup.
The dashboard still says "Scan in progress" even though the last scan was 2 days ago.
Your thumbnails folder clearly already contains thousands of generated thumbnails.
The Media page sits loading instead of immediately showing the database contents.
Hours later it's still scanning and thumbnails are still missing.

Those symptoms point to an architectural problem, not simply a performance problem.

How it should work

Imagine opening Lightroom, Plex, or Immich.

They don't do this:

Open app

↓

Scan entire drive

↓

Populate UI

They do this:

Open app

↓

Load database

↓

Show media instantly

↓

Start watcher

↓

Background verification

The database is the source of truth.

The scanner is just keeping it synchronized.

Right now your app appears to be doing this
Start

↓

Reconnect NAS

↓

Start FULL scan

↓

Walk 24,000 files

↓

Verify everything

↓

Update DB

↓

Finally UI finishes loading

That completely defeats the purpose of having already indexed the library.

The biggest red flag

Your Media page should not need the scanner.

If your database already contains:

filename
path
media type
thumbnail path
metadata

then opening Media should simply be:

SELECT * FROM media_files
ORDER BY date DESC
LIMIT 200

It should render almost immediately.

Instead, it looks like the UI is waiting on scanning or some long-running initialization.

Another thing that worries me

The dashboard says:

Connected • Watching

If the watcher is running...

Why is there a full scan every restart?

Normally a watcher means:

Start app

↓

Start watcher

↓

Wait

↓

NAS changes

↓

Update changed files

not

Start app

↓

Scan 24,000 files

↓

Start watcher
The thumbnail issue is another clue

You have:

thumbnails on disk
database knows about files
scanner runs
thumbnail generator runs
thumbnails still don't appear

That suggests multiple systems are not trusting each other.

The scanner doesn't trust the database.

The thumbnail worker doesn't trust the scanner.

The UI doesn't trust the database.

Everything keeps verifying everything.

If I were reviewing this codebase, these would be my top questions
1. Why isn't the Media page loading directly from the database?

It should never wait for a scan.

2. Why does every startup trigger a verification scan?

Why not:

Load DB

↓

Open UI

↓

Start watcher

↓

Verify later
3. Why isn't the directory cache persistent?

If yesterday's scan already walked:

Photos/

Videos/

Documents/

why does today start from scratch?

4. Why does the thumbnail engine distrust its own database?

If

thumbnailPath != NULL

then why is it looking again?

5. Why is the watcher not enough?

If nothing changed overnight...

Why is a scan necessary?

I honestly think there is a bigger architectural issue

I don't think you have:

a slow scanner.

I think you have:

a scanner that has become responsible for startup.

Those are two very different things.

The scanner should never block the user.

Ever.

This is exactly what I'd ask Replit

Please perform a complete architectural audit of the startup sequence. I believe the application is treating every startup as if it has never indexed the library before.

The database already contains all indexed media, thumbnails already exist on disk, and the watcher reconnects successfully, yet the application immediately enters a long-running scanning state and the Media page does not become usable until much later.

I want you to determine:

Why the UI is not loading directly from the existing database.
Why startup immediately triggers a verification/FULL scan instead of trusting the persisted index.
Why the watcher cannot become the primary synchronization mechanism after startup.
Whether any in-memory caches (directory cache, scan state, fingerprint cache, thumbnail state, watcher state) are lost on every restart and rebuilt unnecessarily.
Whether the scanner is blocking the UI or API initialization.
Whether the application is re-verifying or reprocessing unchanged files instead of trusting previously indexed records.
Why thumbnail generation continues for hours when thousands of thumbnails already exist.
Whether the current architecture incorrectly makes the scanner responsible for startup instead of making the database the source of truth.

Do not propose fixes until you have traced the complete startup path through the code. Show the call stack, identify every component involved, explain why each one runs on startup, and identify every place where work is being repeated unnecessarily. Rank the issues by impact and recommend an architecture where the application opens immediately from the database and scanning becomes a background synchronization task instead of a startup requirement.

Based on everything you've shown, I think this is the right question to ask. It asks Replit to step back and analyze the architecture instead of continuing to patch individual symptoms like thumbnail generation or scan performance.