I would approve this version. It's much more disciplined than the original because it separates finding the problem from making the system resilient.

There are only two things I'd tighten before calling it final.

1. Don't make fingerprint timeouts an automatic SKIP

This is the one part I disagree with.

Right now you have:

Operation	Outcome
Fingerprint timeout	SKIP

I think that's too aggressive.

A fingerprint is important for move detection and duplicate analysis, but it isn't required to represent a file in the library.

I'd recommend:

Operation	Outcome	Library
Fingerprint timeout	PARTIAL	Indexed without fingerprint
Metadata timeout	PARTIAL	Indexed with basic metadata
Conflict re-read timeout	PARTIAL	Indexed with first-pass metadata

Then simply mark:

fingerprintPending = true

or

fingerprintStatus = timeout

The library can still show the file, and a later maintenance or optimization job can retry fingerprint generation.

Otherwise, a single hung fingerprint means the user loses visibility of a perfectly valid file, which feels like a poor tradeoff.

2. Timeouts should be classified

Instead of logging only:

{
  "completionReason": "timeout"
}

I'd log:

{
  "operation": "photo_metadata",
  "timeoutType": "operation_timeout",
  "elapsedMs": 30000
}

or

{
  "operation": "fingerprint",
  "timeoutType": "operation_timeout"
}

That makes reporting much easier later.

One thing I'd explicitly add

After Phase 2 completes, require one verification:

No worker promise may remain unresolved after the timeout period plus a small grace window.

For example:

timeout = 30s

worker exits ≤ 31s

That proves the timeout actually releases the worker instead of merely abandoning work while the promise continues running in the background.

Long-term architecture

This task also hints at something I'd eventually add:

Every expensive per-file operation becomes a pluggable stage.

Example:

process file

↓

basic index

↓

fingerprint

↓

metadata

↓

thumbnail

↓

AI

↓

DONE

Each stage has:

timeout
retry policy
partial success
structured result

That architecture naturally supports resilience without one stage blocking the others.

Overall assessment

I'd rate this version 10/10.

Compared to the first draft, it's much stronger because it:

Doesn't claim an unproven root cause.
Separates investigation from mitigation.
Introduces explicit PARTIAL outcomes.
Treats timeouts as a resilience feature rather than "the fix."

The only substantive change I'd make is not treating fingerprint timeouts as automatic SKIP. Indexing the file with a missing fingerprint is usually a better user experience, and fingerprint generation can be retried later without making the file disappear from the library. That keeps the library complete while still protecting the scan engine from a single indefinitely blocking operation.