I think this is a much stronger task. The biggest improvement is that you've separated what is definitely broken from what is still a hypothesis.

I agree with the confirmed bug

If the worker is created with eval: true and the evaluated script contains top-level return statements, then:

the worker never executes its intended logic,
it throws a JavaScript syntax/runtime error,
and "Illegal return statement" is exactly the kind of error I'd expect.

That is a concrete bug that explains why the Test NAS Path feature fails. It's a legitimate bug to fix regardless of anything else.

I also like that you've decoupled it from the scan issue

This is the important change.

Instead of saying:

"This fixes the scan."

You're now saying:

"This fixes the broken Worker. The scan stalls are still under investigation."

That's much more defensible.

One thing I'd still add

Because the Worker has apparently never worked correctly, I'd make the acceptance criteria slightly stronger.

Instead of only:

returns online: true

I'd verify both success and failure paths.

For example:

Success
valid directory

↓

online=true

↓

message="Online — path is accessible"
Failure
nonexistent directory

↓

online=false

↓

ENOENT
Timeout

Simulate a worker timeout and verify:

online=false

reason=timeout

That gives you confidence the Worker behaves correctly in all three terminal cases.

I would also be careful with this statement

Remove readdirSync; statSync + accessSync is sufficient.

That's probably true for your definition of reachability, but I'd state it explicitly:

Reachability is defined as:

path exists
path is a directory
path is readable

That way you aren't implicitly changing the semantics of the health check.

About switching the monitor to async

I agree with doing it, but I'd make one operational requirement explicit:

The monitor must never run overlapping checks.

For example, if a check takes 10 seconds and the timer fires every 20 seconds, you're fine.

But if a check hangs for 30 seconds, you don't want another check starting before the first one finishes.

A simple "only one health check in flight" guard prevents piling up worker threads.

I'd also log why a pause happened

This is something I'd definitely add.

Instead of only:

requestPause()

Log:

{
  "scanId": "...",
  "pauseSource": "library_monitor",
  "consecutiveFailures": 2,
  "reason": "NAS unreachable"
}

That way if you ever see:

{
  "pauseSource": "user"
}

or

{
  "pauseSource": "worker_timeout"
}

you immediately know the monitor wasn't responsible.

Overall

I think this version is solid.

At this point I actually see two independent work items emerging:

A. Definite bug
Fix the Worker.
Fix the Test NAS Path button.
Add regression tests.

That's straightforward and should be merged.

B. Possible contributor to scan instability
Async monitor.
Debounce.
Single in-flight check.
Pause logging.

Those are worthwhile robustness improvements, but I'd continue to describe them as preventative improvements until the logs show that the monitor is actually what's pausing your scans.

That separation keeps the engineering honest while still improving the reliability of the application.