like the direction of #160, but I'd make one important architectural adjustment.

Right now it combines one correctness fix with three UX improvements. Those are related, but they solve different problems and should be validated independently.

Overall: 9.5/10

The diagnosis is good, but I'd tighten a few assumptions and clarify the acceptance criteria.

Problem 1: Filtering DELETED rows

This is the strongest part of the task.

If existingByPath is intended to represent the current live library, then loading rows already marked DELETED is unnecessary work and can definitely distort diagnostics.

However, I'd soften this statement:

"db_load_complete.rows matches the true live-file count."

That is only true if every consumer of the library defines "live" exactly the same way.

I'd instead write:

db_load_complete.rows equals the number of database rows eligible for reconciliation during this scan.

That avoids accidentally coupling the instrumentation to UI semantics.

Problem 2: Library count vs scan count

I completely agree these are different quantities.

I'd actually define them explicitly.

For example:

Metric	Meaning
Scan Files	Files discovered on disk during the current scan
Library Files	Files currently represented in the database
Pending Deletions	Database rows awaiting reconciliation

Once those definitions exist, the UI confusion largely disappears.

I would avoid hiding counts

This is the one thing I'd change.

Instead of:

hide totals behind "Syncing..."

I'd prefer showing both numbers.

For example:

Library
24,564 files

Scan
16,173 discovered
(syncing)

or

Library
24,564 files
Updating…

Hiding information usually makes users wonder whether something is broken.

Don't assume the counts should always agree

This sentence:

After the scan fully finalises the displayed numbers agree.

I'd rewrite.

They should agree if:

no scan errors
deletion reconciliation completed
no concurrent file changes
no ignored files changed

I'd instead require:

After a successful FULL scan reaches its terminal state, the library count converges to the reconciled on-disk file count.

That's much more precise.

Delta indicator

Completely agree.

Raw

-4

means nothing.

I'd make it:

4 removed

or

Removed: 4

Much clearer.

I'd add one more verification

Right now the task proves the UI.

I'd also verify the database.

After completion:

Files on disk

=

Live DB rows

+

Ignored files

+

Intentional exclusions

Otherwise you could end up with matching UI numbers while the DB is still inconsistent.

I would split this into two subtasks

Personally I'd separate it like this.

#160A — Scan Count Correctness
Filter DELETED rows
Verify reconciliation counts
Verify deletion detection
Verify DB counts
#160B — Scan Count UX
Syncing labels
Delta wording
Progress wording
Dashboard messaging

That way if the backend fix uncovers another issue, you don't have to untangle it from UI changes.

One more thing I'd instrument

Since you're already doing #156, I'd add one more lifecycle log.

{
  "phase": "reconciliation_complete",
  "diskFiles": 16173,
  "liveDbRows": 16173,
  "deletedRows": 8391,
  "ignoredFiles": 0
}

That gives you a single authoritative checkpoint proving reconciliation worked before the UI updates.

Final assessment

This is another solid task, but I would frame it as "count reconciliation" rather than "count mismatch."

The mismatch isn't inherently a bug—it's expected during reconciliation. The real problems are:

Potentially incorrect reconciliation inputs (loading already-DELETED rows).
A UI that doesn't explain why two different counts are temporarily different.

Addressing those separately will make both the backend behavior and the user experience easier to reason about.